Our journey today starts with reactivity.
And that's really the update core for
pretty much any UI framework.
And in the case of SolidJS is actually
the single kind of driving force.
Understanding reactivity is
really understanding SolidJS.
So that's why we start here.
So what is reactive programming?
It's actually a lot of different
things to a lot of different people.
Not to mention, it's become kind of
a buzzword for the last couple years.
It is actually a bit tricky to nail down,
which is why I love this comic.
Because I think it's fair to say
that there's a lot of confusion
with the topic and it's sometimes because
it's in some ways simple hard to explain.
Honestly, I've been trying to
explain this to people for years and
I still have a hard time.
So here we are and the problem is looking
at the answer doesn't really help.
I mean, there's a lot of text
not to worry about it too much.
But if you go to Wikipedia, and it's like
in computing reactive programming is
a declarative programming paradigm
concerned with data streams and
propagation of change.
With this paradigm,
it is possible expressed static or
dynamic data streams with ease and also.
I'm sorry, this for me at least
this doesn't say anything to me.
And you keep on looking around
a bit more and you're like, okay?
Stack Overflow, well, this like
don't worry about the blob of text.
But if someone goes and gives you a full
history of functional reactive programming
in academia and talks about various
papers that as historical markers.
There's also something called
the reactive manifesto,
which probably might
sound good to your boss.
It's about how to make systems that are
reactive from like a development planning
perspective.
There's also reactivity used for
responsive design.
The word kinda doesn't
mean anything anymore.
I'm gonna try and focus on the programming
paradigm, and more specifically
the programming paradigm that you
find commonly in the UI frameworks.
This is just as I said,
it's very hard to find a specific answer.
So I tried to come up with my own,
it is not perfect.
But this is the best I've come with so
far.
This is probably too generic,
it's not amazing.
But it's kind of hard to define
such loosely defined terms.
So for me reactivity is to declaratively
express the relationship between values
that change over time.
What do I mean by that?
See the problem with this definition
is I still need an explanation.
The way I think about it is like
a system of live equations.
See like a normal assignment
represents like a single point of time,
you say that after this happens
a reflects the sum of b plus c.
But if b or c change,
then you do another assignment.
This is just kind of standard algebra,
so to speak.
This relationship does not hold.
But reactive programming is a programming
paradigm around modeling your system based
on rules so that this does hold.
So that at any point in the future if b or
c updates,
a is also updated and you've seen
this all before in application.
The spreadsheet is probably the most
common one that kind of helps people think
about it like if you
have equations in cells.
You update one cell, it immediately
updates in the other location.
In JavaScript, reactivity is kinda
come out in two forms primarily.
And it's Interesting both of these kinda
came out of Microsoft in the mid 2000s.
Basically, there's the first type
here that I'm gonna mention,
which is what we're gonna focus on today,
which I call fine-grained signals.
It's a simple event emitters that hold a
value that represent that value over time.
The key part to take away here is
that it's about a primitive that owns
the value.
You can think of it as a variable or
as a value.
The other one, Reactive Streams or Rx,
which in a lot of circles
are more popular.
If you've heard of RxJS or
RxJava is a series a collection of data
events that are emitted over time.
There's a lot of overlap between these
concepts and between these approaches.
But because they're kinda set
up to solve different problems,
I'm only really gonna focus
on the first one today.
The second one is better for
async transformations,
values that change over time and
that's why we see a lot on the server.
The first one is about synchronization.
And synchronization is very important for
UI frameworks.
And this is why we like
fine-grained reactive programming.
First of all, it's declarative.
I mean, most reactive programming is.
That means relationships are set once and
then executed.
You can describe the behavior
rather than the implementation.
It's also composable.
It's easy to kinda build higher level
behaviors, wrap them and modularize them.
But the main reason that I like
fine-grained reactivity is because of
the language aspect of it.
There's really only three
concepts you need to know.
You need to know about signals, which
are this observable state that updates.
You need to know about derivations,
which are these computed values and
then you need to know about side effects.
That's like when you console.log
something or render something.
It's very convenient, if you've ever
used or seen something like RxJS,
which has a different purpose.
There's like over 50 or 70 different
operators to interact with this.
What's really nice about reactivity,
is you can basically just write
normal looking expressions.
And that's what we're gonna look
at here because this is not new.
Some of this might even sound familiar and
you might have seen in
some other frameworks.
I'm gonna show a few examples
of it in different frameworks.
So you can get some familiarity here, see
if kinda it ties it all together for you.
I just wanna emphasize how
widespread these ideas are,
especially from a language perspective.
So I mentioned this one before,
my old favorite KnockoutJS, back in 2010,
kind of introduced this
kind of reactivity.
And it has different names, they called
their primitives observables and
computed and pure computed.
And this is lovely like ES5
style JavaScript with this.
You can kinda see that it had
this kind of idea of like
having like first name and
last name and full name,
all being kind of built from
basically a special data type.
Move forward a few years and
we see reactivity make a bit of a comeback
in React around 2015, with MobX.
This time they took a slightly
different approach.
They still call their stuff observable,
but now there is a decorators doing it.
So they said that hey,
this component is the observer or
in our case our side effect.
And then they annotated
different variables to say that
hey this is React like seconds
past here is an observable.
Svelte 2019, four years later,
they did a very minimalist syntax.
What we see here is in fact their let
variable is actually very special.
It's not a normal JavaScript let,
it's actually a signal or
a reactive variable under the hood.
And they use $ signs to indicate
that these are derived or
computed values and
continuing this trend Vue Composition.
They use things like ref and
reactive to define these variables.
And this is what I would focus on here.
These frameworks are actually still based
on based around these three language
features that I'm talking about.
They have other APIs you can look at it,
but you're gonna find in all of them
you're gonna find a reactive atom or
that signal, that state.
You're gonna find a derived value and
you're gonna find effects.
It's all the same kind of language and
I've got one more example for
you kind of think about.
React has those three primitives too,
useState, useMemo, useEffect.
So I often like posing this
question is React reactive,
is even been some discussion
acknowledgement from the core
team in the past that React isn't
like purely a reactive system.
But this is a pretty nuanced discussion.
And in my opinion,
React has every right to claim to being
as reactive as something like Svelte.
Both on their data change or
their primitives,
they actually trigger an invalidation
that causes a component to rerun.
Some people might get hung up on the fact
that, in some frameworks it's magical.
You just use an assignment,
other ones you call set state.
But mechanically,
we're talking about these same language.
So while I'm gonna admit that React
is not like the reactivity that we're
gonna be covering today mechanically,
we are seeing this sort of convergence
on the language of user interfaces,
which I think is very interesting.
And something kinda keep in the back
of your mind as we continue through
this session.